Add blog post Q Learning (Deep RL Class Unit 2) (#307)
huggingface/blog: deep-rl-q-part1.md

> ---

Reviewer: This heading section should also be in the part2 blog post

title: "An Introduction to Q-Learning Part 1"

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/thumbnail.gif

Reviewer: I love this thumbnail gif!

---

<html>
<head>
<style>
.center {
  display: block;
  margin-left: auto;
  margin-right: auto;
  width: 50%;
}
</style>

> <h1>An Introduction to Q-Learning Part 1</h1>

Reviewer: I wonder if this blog post should be renamed to something about monte carlo and temporal difference learning or bellman since that's really the topic of this post, that way it can be a bit more independent.

Author: Intially I wanted to do that, but I think that an introduction to monte carlo and temporal difference learning can be less "exciting" than Q-Learning.
By having Q-Learning has a title people understand the end goal of why they need to learn first that part

Reviewer: SG!

---
In the [first chapter of this class](https://huggingface.co/blog/deep-rl-intro), we learned about Reinforcement Learning (RL), the RL process, and the different methods to solve an RL problem. We also trained our first lander agent to **land correctly on the Moon 🌕 and uploaded it to the Hugging Face Hub.**

So today, we're going to **dive deeper into one of the Reinforcement Learning methods: value-based methods** and study our first RL algorithm: **Q-Learning.**

We'll also **implement our first RL agent from scratch**: a Q-Learning agent and will train it in two environments:

1. Frozen-Lake-v1 (non-slippery version): where our agent will need to **go from the starting state (S) to the goal state (G)** by walking only on frozen tiles (F) and avoiding holes (H).
2. An autonomous taxi will need **to learn to navigate** a city to **transport its passengers from point A to point B.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/envs.gif" alt="Environments"/>
</figure>

> This unit will be divided into 2 parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This unit is divided into 2 parts:
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/two_parts.jpg" alt="Two Parts"/>
</figure>

In the first part, we'll **learn about the value-based methods and the difference between Monte Carlo and Temporal Difference Learning.**

And in the second part, **we'll study our first RL algorithm: Q-Learning, and implement our first RL Agent.**

> This chapter is fundamental **if you want to be able to work on Deep Q-Learning** (chapter 3): the first Deep RL algorithm that was able to play Atari games and **beat the human level on some of them** (breakout, space invaders…).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This unit is fundamental **if you want to be able to work on Deep Q-Learning** (unit 3): the first Deep RL algorithm that was able to play Atari games and **beat the human level on some of them** (breakout, space invaders…).
```

So let's get started!

> TODO: Add table des matières

Reviewer: TODO before merge

Author: ✔️

## **What is RL? A short recap**

In RL, we build an agent that can **make smart decisions**. For instance, an agent that **learns to play a video game.** Or a trading agent that **learns to maximize its benefits** by making smart decisions on **what stocks to buy and when to sell.**
  
<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/rl-process.jpg" alt="RL process"/>
</figure>

But, to make intelligent decisions, our agent will learn from the environment by **interacting with it through trial and error** and receiving rewards (positive or negative) **as unique feedback.**

Its goal **is to maximize its expected cumulative reward** (because of the reward hypothesis).

> **The agent's brain is called the policy π.** It's where the agent makes its decision-making process: given a state, our policy will output an action or a probability distribution over actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The agent's decision-making process is called the policy π:** given a state, a policy will output an action or a probability distribution over actions. That is, given an observation of the environment, a policy will provide an action (or multiple probabilities for each action) that the agent should take.
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/policy.jpg" alt="Policy"/>
</figure>

> **Our goal is to find an optimal policy π***, aka, a policy that leads to the best expected cumulative reward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Our goal is to find an optimal policy π***, aka., a policy that leads to the best expected cumulative reward.
```

And to find this optimal policy (hence solving the RL problem), there **are two main types of RL methods**:

> - *Policy-based methods*: **Train our policy directly** to learn which action to take, given a state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Policy-based methods*: **Train the policy directly** to learn which action to take given a state.
```

> But what means acting according to our policy? We don't have a policy in value-based methods since we train a value function and not a policy?
>

Remember that the goal of an **RL agent is to have an optimal policy π.**

To find it, we learned that there are two different methods:

- *Policy-based methods:* **Directly train the policy** to select what action to take given a state (or a probability distribution over actions at that state). In this case, we **don't have a value function.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/two-approaches-2.jpg" alt="Two RL approaches"/>
</figure>

The policy takes a state as input and outputs what action to take at that state (deterministic policy).

And consequently, **we don't define by hand the behavior of our policy; it's the training that will define it.**

- *Value-based methods:* **Indirectly, by training a value function** that outputs the value of a state or a state-action pair. Given this value function, our policy **will take action.**

> But, because we didn't train our policy, **we need to specify its behavior.** For instance, if we want a policy that, given the value function, will take actions that always lead to the biggest value, **we'll create a Greedy Policy.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, because we didn't train our policy, **we need to specify its behavior.** For instance, if we want a policy that, given the value function, will take actions that always lead to the biggest reward, **we'll create a Greedy Policy.**
```

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/two-approaches-3.jpg" alt="Two RL approaches"/>
  <figcaption>Given a state, our action-value function (that we train) outputs the value of each action at that state, then our greedy policy (that we defined) selects the action with the biggest state-action pair value.</figcaption>
</figure>

Consequently, whatever method you use to solve your problem, **you will have a policy**, but in the case of value-based methods you don't train it, your policy **is just a simple function that you specify** (for instance greedy policy) and this policy **uses the values given by the value-function to select its actions.**

So the difference is:

- In policy-based, **the optimal policy is found by training the policy directly.**
- In value-based, **finding an optimal value function leads to having an optimal policy.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">

>   <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/link-value-policy.jpg" alt="Link between value and policy"/>

Reviewer: in the image, "have" should be "having"

Author: No pb I modify it

Author: ✔️

- We just started to train our Value function, **so it returns 0 value for each state**
- Our learning rate (lr) is 0.1 and our discount rate is 1 (= no discount)
- Our mouse **explore the environment and take random actions**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/MC-4.jpg" alt="Monte Carlo"/>
</figure>
  
- The mouse made more than 10 steps, so the episode ends .

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/MC-4p.jpg" alt="Monte Carlo"/>
</figure>

- We have a list of state, action, rewards, next_state, **we need to calculate the return Gt**
- Gt = Rt+1 + Rt+2 + Rt+3… (for simplicity we don’t discount the rewards).
- Gt = 1 + 0 + 0 + 0+ 0 + 0 + 1 + 1+ 0 + 0
- Gt= 3
- We can now update V(S0):

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/MC-5.jpg" alt="Monte Carlo"/>
</figure>

- New V(S0) = V(S0) + lr * [Gt — V(S0)]
- New V(S0) = 0 + 0.1 * [3 –0]
- The new V(S0) = 0.3

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/MC-5p.jpg" alt="Monte Carlo"/>
</figure>

> 

Author: That imply calculating all states 😢 . We will have a end Q-table on the next chapter so people will see what it looks like.

> 

Reviewer: SG!

</figure>
  
<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/TD-3.jpg" alt="Temporal Difference"/>
</figure>

We can now update V(S0):

New V(S0) = V(S0) + lr * [R1 + gamma * V(S1) — V(S0)]

New V(S0) = 0 + 0.1 * [1 + 0.99 * 0–0]

The new V(S0) = 0.1

So we just updated our value function for State 0.

Now we **continue to interact with this environment with our updated value function.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/TD-3p.jpg" alt="Temporal Difference"/>
</figure>

 
If we summarize:

- With Monte Carlo, we update the value function from a complete episode, and so we **use the actual accurate discounted return of this episode.**
- With TD learning, we update the value function from a step, so we replace Gt that we don't have with **an estimated return called TD target.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/Summary.jpg" alt="Summary"/>
</figure>

So now, before diving on Q-Learning, let's summarise what we just learned:

We have two types of value-based functions:

> - State-value function: outputs the expected return if **I start at that state and then act accordingly to the policy forever after.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- State-Value function: outputs the expected return if **the agent starts at a given state and acts accordingly to the policy forever after.**
```

> - Action-Value function: outputs the expected return if **I start in that state and I take that action at that state** and then I act accordingly to the policy forever after.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Action-Value function: outputs the expected return if **the agent starts in a given state, takes a given action at that state** and then acts accordingly to the policy forever after.
```

- In value-based methods, **we define the policy by hand** because we don't train it, we train a value function. The idea is that if we have an optimal value function, we **will have an optimal policy.**

There are two types of methods to learn a policy or a value function:

- With *the Monte Carlo method*, we update the value function from a complete episode, and so we **use the actual accurate discounted return of this episode.**
- With *the TD Learning method,* we update the value function from a step, so we replace Gt that we don't have with **an estimated return called TD target.**

<figure class="image table text-center m-0 w-full">
  <img src="assets/70_deep_rl_q_part1/summary-learning-mtds.jpg" alt="Summary"/>
</figure>

---
So that’s all for today. Congrats on finishing this first part of the chapter! There was a lot of information.

**That’s normal if you still feel confused with all these elements**. This was the same for me and for all people who studied RL.

> **Take time to really grasp the material before continuing**. In the second part, we’ll study our first RL algorithm: Q-Learning, and implement our first RL Agent in two environments:

Reviewer: Maybe mention part 2 is released this friday
